This is Fred Bass and Nancy Bass.
I don't have an office.
These are all great quotes by the way.
Have you ever had an office?
The office on the main floor that was up there was built for me 25 years ago.
It was built specifically for me.
I spent about two hours in it.
For the first year, I spent about two hours in it, and my bookkeepers just moved in and took it over.
They left me a desk for about six months, and then they took over the desk.
You decided you didn't want to be on the floor?
You have to be or you want to be?
Well, that's where I'm productive.
And do you feel the same way?
She's nodding her head in the affirmative.
So tell me where we are.
And you own this building now, right?
This is where we receive shipments of manures and quantities and stuff.
and do our processing up here and our storage.
And I'm just taking it physically through the warehouse just to show you the storage.
What would you estimate the square footage up here?
10,500.
10,005?
And it's packed.
There's a room there that's filled with stuff and storage.
And there's boxes blocking the aisles.
Now, most of these things are under control.
You can retrieve most of them.
One, two, three, four, five, six, seven.
So I see there's more.
I know, but I'm just counting with the red here.
Is this largely review?
Why is so much inventory essential?
I can't answer the question.
That's why you've got to have such a big spread.
of books to keep people around.
And I think that you've got to grab the bargain that you want.
Grab the bargain?
Yeah, but a lot of, you've got an MBA, Nancy.
Is it costing you money to store so much inventory?
It is.
That's why we want to open up another floor and get as much stuff as we can.
because especially the New York rental market.
That was the theory, wasn't it, when you opened up the Fulton Street store?
Fulton Street is 15,000 square feet.
And we figured that at least we can get rid of part of the 10th floor.
This is unbelievable.
Yeah.
I think the books just multiply.
Hold this for me.
Sure.
I'm going to take a few pictures.
Don't worry about it.
I'm just wandering around with you.
The books just multiply at night.
It's really nothing to do with us.
Don't you think?
I don't even want to take you down there because the thing is so... Who does all the buying?
Do you do the buying?
I do most of the buying over the counter when I'm here, but I have backup buyers here, of course.
The remainder of buying is done by a team.
Mostly one of my men, Paul Secord, does it with a backup team from the art department and the review department.
The review does their own buying.
most of the time.
Rare Book Room does their buying, but we buy a lot of rare books on the main floor and send them upstairs.
And you move a lot of stuff, like proofs that come in and galleys.
Yeah, they come from all different departments.
So there's a lot of team buying going on here.
I essentially control the buying in the store yet.
What do you wild-ass estimate guess of what you have in terms of logging?
Two and a half million books plus.
In this location?
In this location.
Wow.
Well, you know, our slogan is eight miles of books, but it's really more like... Twelve and a half miles of books.
Yeah, but it's too hard to change the slogan at this point.
More than most libraries.
Yeah.
But physically, you can see what we have up here.
They're just, you know, the boxes are all under control.
Do you know what's in all of these places?
Yeah.
Up here, pretty much everything's under control.
And the control means that it's cataloged.
It's cataloged.
It's either in the computer or in a record index.
So the boxes are labeled, and they say the price on it, and they say how many books are in the boxes, and when they got it in with the publisher.
I'm having a major check.
Take a shot.
Let's see what gets you a better aisle.
How about the center aisle?
Or do you want boxes?
Where he can kind of like go into debt?
Do you want boxes?
The lights out now.
I love this.
It's better lit.
Oh yeah.
It's always.
I don't know if you're going to get it through there, Chad.
How many employees are?
About 185.
185 employees.
I think that's the fun of at least downstairs.
I think that some of the fun of downstairs is that, you know, it is a little chaotic, like up here in the warehouse, too, where we're getting in all these books all the time.
We're getting in lots, and Fred's pricing them, and we're getting in all the new books.
So it almost, it's such a different feel from any other place because you can, the books get priced right away, and they're out right away.
So it's, and you can see, but you can watch him buying it right from, you know, where you're buying the books from.
Your father says he has a book madness.
Do you have that as well?
Yeah.
We used to see boxes in the aisle.
We used to see the boxes piled in the aisle.
Those are just shipments that came in temporarily.
Wherever I go, I go and visit the bookstores.
I was just in Bucks County, and I visited bookstores there.
And I bought, even buy books all the time from other stores.
You mentioned the last thing you shared in English.
And I go to the flea markets.
When I went out there, I bought a whole lot of books from there, too.
I'm always doing that.
You go to the homes and the people who work for you and their homes look like this.
Oh, exactly like this.
It's amazing.
Pick up one.
What were you saying about that?
Whenever I go to the homes of any of the employees or the managers, they look exactly like the Strand.
There's books piled up on the floors and on the shelves everywhere.
It's a little bit disorganized.
And there's very little room for furniture and for living.
It's all books.
Does that mean that you attract?
Yes.
Oh, wait, there's a little more I want to show them here yet.
The type of employees love books, and they
They loved collecting things, and they loved old books, especially.
And that's across the board.
I'm so surprised, every single one of them.
This used to be our old rare book department.
Yeah, so now the three rooms are also filled up with remainders and processing of things we're doing and stuff.
You know, stuff I can't resist.
They're full leather and half leather books.
They might have those for the next 10 to 15 years.
So I bought them for a long time because I get constant calls from these things.
And they're all classic titles that we'll never go out of.
For instance, why don't you just read a couple off Nancy?
I see the background by Dr. Daphne de Maurier.
The Iliad, The Odyssey, Copperfield.
Mary Shelley has heard that the price, look at the price.
Wow, $5.95, that's the strand place.
And does it move pretty well?
Oh, yeah, yeah.
At that price it does.
And that's nicely illustrated in a box.
And the same with the Franklins.
The Franklins are half leather, books are $15.
And to think that you go into a regular bookstore and you pay like $25 for just any kind of a hardbound book that says nothing, you can get classic leather books for $15 here.
Excuse me.
This is really the heart of the business up here.
Well, I don't want to say that.
Would you say that, that this is the heart of the business?
I think it's downstairs with the used, yeah.
But it's a combination.
Yeah, it's a part of the team.
Do you have an idea of how many people on average walk in?
I don't even want to know.
All right.
Yeah, yeah.
That's really great.
Now, when you were going to the University of Wisconsin, did you plan to come into that?
Yeah, I always did.
Did you?
I always wanted to, yeah.
Do you have any siblings?
Because I think, yeah, I do.
I have an older brother who's not interested.
But I think that the reason why I wanted to is because I know how much my father loves it, so that was always reflected, and I thought this would be the greatest thing to do.
I mean, I tried other things.
I worked for Esson for a while.
I mean, I did a lot of small.
I worked as an intern and worked in an advertising company.
For Exxon, I was a business consultant.
I had a sales and territory service station, and I kind of was in between with Exxon.
I really enjoyed it.
I really liked the gasoline station owners.
So you actually did try other things before coming in here?
Yeah.
Or was this for experience?
For experience to do this.
And you're a partner with your father now, is that right?
Do you have a formal title?
Do you have titles here?
Well, I'm a part owner, too.
I mean, he's got the majority, but he should.
Well, would you say that you were motivated to come into this business as much because it is a tradition?
If you weren't here to assume the mantle that it would be the disappearance of an institution?
I don't think so.
I mean, it really depends on who bought it, so I'm having a hard time kind of projecting it, but I would think definitely if a corporation bought it, it definitely would not be the same.
It would be, well, Barnes & Noble's opened up that annex, that used book annex, and that failed miserably.
They lost lots and lots of money.
I'm sorry.
Hi.
Do you want us to go around, or can you unblock that a little bit?
Oh, OK.
OK, thanks.
Yeah.
I don't know.
I think it's always, you know, you always lose something, too, if somebody doesn't have an interest in a business, where it's not personal, where they're not here all the time, because my father and I are here almost all the time.
So there's always a, there's basically a boss here.
Yeah.
I think that's important to you.
I think it is, yeah.
I mean, it's really hard work, too, with the amount of time that you spend here.
I mean, but it's not such hard work if you really love it, though.
You know, some of them don't want you to,
I don't touch it.
I want you to remember that.
It's something you want to talk about.
You introduced this book rental.
I'm interested in talking about that.
I'm going to have a chapter in this talk about institutional libraries and how books still matter.
Believe it or not, in this technological paradigm shift that they're going on.
Are you noticing a slowdown in acquisitions from colleges?
No, no.
No, our library business is still very healthy, and they're very active.
And they come to us mainly because of price.
They save a lot of money.
We have the books, but the price is very important to a lot of them.
They're spending so much money on technology, they've got to save some money on it.
Watch your staff.
It's a little hot.
Is this a traditional area?
What's that?
Is this something you just noticed?
The library is traveling.
And we're talking academic libraries.
Academic libraries and public libraries.
Would you have a ballpark guess of how many libraries you do business with on a regular basis?
Thousands.
Thousands?
All over the world.
Hundreds are actors.
but occasionally thousands, yeah.
So what happens?
Do you think that they send you a list of newly published books and try and have you fill them?
Oh, I'll explain.
We'll explain later on.
I just want to show you the madness of this operation, because most of these, not all of them, are new libraries that we acquired.
These are private-type libraries or individual libraries?
Maybe your questions are... 10th floor.
These are part of the Hilton Head.
We pick more.
We send the annex.
We send some of them as we can.
Do you want to put, like, annex instead of a label?
Oh, yeah.
We just have to mark these off.
Mary Shelley Frankenstein books.
Are you showing me downstairs?
Yeah, extra storage for them.
Yeah, but how many did you buy?
Yeah, that's whole block.
I couldn't say none for that.
Most of these things here are collections of books they've bought, but I haven't gotten to yet.
So there are estates and things that you've got?
Libraries that Marvin has bought, or I've bought, and they're in storage up there.
So there's a very good possibility that there's some rare books in here.
Oh, there's a lot.
There's a whole... I would say there's at least 2,000 boxes for the rare book department to process.
That they're here.
That they'll never get to.
Don't say that.
You don't know what's in there.
Well, we'll let Marvin retire until he does them.
He doesn't do them anymore, so he's just terrible.
Up here are still... Lonnie?
Is this open?
How old is this building?
1901.
What was it originally?
An office building?
Manufacturing.
Bill?
We officially describe ourselves as being in the East Village, is that right?
Well, that's the village.
I'm not going to drag you through.
There's three rooms back there.
There's two big rooms back there and all this whole stuff.
The 10th floor is just filled with boxes.
I took it over temporarily about four years ago.
Just a little spot up there I took from the landlord before I bought the building.
Little by little I filled it.
So where did you keep this stuff before you acquired the building?
I just keep multiplying.
But everything is on site, though.
You don't have any other warehouses?
No.
No, I've got 81.
What's wrong?
Oh, they're working on it.
Do we have maps this way?
Um, we can show them that.
Do you have maps?
Mm-hmm.
All right, we'll go down the street.
You don't see them up there, I think.
Nice, nice.
Need the idea.
Uh, this is celebrating, though.
We're working on it.
What?
I think it's not based on the payment.
Oh, okay.
All right, let's go down to the back.
There was a piece in Fortune magazine, and I can't say I read the whole thing, but it was about some guy who moved from here doing that piece.
Yeah, it was with Capitol.
Yeah.
He's in this book.
Well, it's right.
The boxes go way back there, too.
You want to see it?
This isn't Doyle up here, huh?
No, that's not Doyle.
Is that a cutter?
No, this is.
You've actually gone through this.
Unbelievable.
I've never seen anything like this.
I've seen places filled with books, but I've never seen places filled with boxes.
These are things we've got to get through.
I'm sorry, what?
We bought a library of 20,000 books.
From a customer of mine from way back.
All handpicked by him.
Probably many of them bought here.
I don't know where he's going to put it, but... Lonnie, Lonnie, this is Nicholas Basman's book.
That book is really famous.
Did you do tours and things?
Yeah.
Wow.
I'm still doing stuff.
I'm giving the keynote address at the A.B.
Bookman's weekly thing out in Colorado Springs.
Wow.
Did you do TV, too?
I was on, you know, the Brian Lamb book, Book Notes?
Sure.
I'm in there.
Wow.
My interviewer's in there.
He picked my interviewer and put me in Storytellers, which is very nice.
Oh, if we, uh, the, uh, Poulter's going to bring out the owl edition, finally, of my book in March.
Yeah?
Oh, that's great.
With a new preface.
I'm going to write a 4,000-word update.
Of disease?
Just, you know, things that have happened in three years.
Bloomberg is out of jail and back in jail again.
Carter Burden died.
You know, his library went to the Morgan.
Chef Louis died.
Haskell Norman not only died, but his library is one of the biggest sales at auction of the life.
So that kind of stuff.
And Aaron Lansky, the Yiddish Book Center, finally opened in Hampshire.
So there's some nice, cute things.
And it proves the essential theme of the book is the cycle of books.
You just mentioned 20,000 books that you bought that are coming back here.
Probably 10,000 of them came here.
Originally, the guy was a customer of mine 30 years ago.
He disappeared on me for the last 10 years, but he moved up to Connecticut, and suddenly he's had to move, and he didn't want to move the book.
So did these 20,000 books come out of an apartment?
No, it's a house.
Out of a house.
Wow.
Which is really great.
It's all this recycling, you know, the books.
They just keep coming back, and people can read them, and then they can... I know the picture you have is a little terrific, but this is kind of cool, too.
Let's give me another one.
Okay.
That's great.
Excellent.
Thank you.
I like it.
I use my own pictures in my books, too.
You know, you were asking me about, you know, I don't know if you've been to a lot of employees' homes, but it's exactly like the store, where it's books everywhere, and I was saying that.
Now, my home, on the other hand, is just the opposite of the store.
Why is that?
I have, um, I bring books home all the time.
I read them, and then I return them right away to the store.
Because I want, I want people, it's a good book, I want people to read it.
When did you start working with your father?
I was about 13 years old.
I used to come down and sleep.
So you've always been in the business?
Were you like your daughter?
Did you go after school?
No, I worked after school.
The only time I tried to... Well, I had a few other jobs, you know, small jobs after school.
like a runner for Joey Gold Theatre Ticket Service, which I made a lot of money at as a kid.
Has he seen the office?
Huh?
Has he seen the third floor or the office?
He knows the third floor.
He goes up the real book room all the time, so he knows that part of the operation.
They told my wife and daughters if they get lost today to Carl Craig.
He'll know where you are.
He goes down on a conveyor belt.
Shrink wrap.
Shipping.
This is not for here.
Is this for here?
Yeah, it's here.
Sorry?
Okay.
That's Marvin's office right there.
And this is the clinical department.
which will soon practically disappear.
So, we're now in the... This is the computer room, and this is where we do our desktop publishing.
We're going to just leave that there, don't worry about it.
And we'll go on a... You don't mind if it's...
Episodic, I mean, if we went around.
Whatever you like.
Tell me a little bit, if you can give me a little chronology.
When did your father start the business?
It started in 1927.
You're going to have all that in the papers for yourself.
So you're going to have a background there.
I started working for them after school when I was 13, 14 years old.
And I continued until I got out of college.
Then I went into the Army for two years.
Where'd you go to college?
I went to Brooklyn College.
Sorry?
Were you planning?
I mean, did you always know that you'd be coming into this business?
No, no, I didn't.
I know I liked it, but I didn't know I would be here.
Where was your dad located?
Well, we were starving when I was going to school.
And, you know, it was a very tough city.
Was your father one of these 4th Avenue booksellers?
Originally, the store was on 4th Avenue.
The original store was on Astro Place.
And then we moved to 4th Avenue.
And for a period until about 25, no, I'm told about 40 some odd years ago, we were on 4th Avenue and we lost our lease.
And we were one of the first stores to move off 4th Avenue.
You were one of the first?
First stores.
How many were left at that?
There were about 48 stores on 4th Avenue.
At a time.
28 stores and warehouses and offices that, you know, booksellers that operated out of office.
And the gentleman who handles rare books for you, Marvin Mondland, has been working on a history.
He was working on 4th Avenue.
He also, for as long as I've known him, has been working on a history.
And at some point I'm going to talk to Marvin about that, because I'd love that you can get some quotes about the tradition from which you emerged.
What happened?
What happened for 4th Avenue?
Yeah, what happened?
Okay.
The standard reason, Fourth Avenue, the standard accepted reason that Fourth Avenue disappeared by everybody is that the rents went up and were too high for the youth book business.
I've been challenging that right along.
I said the real reason Fourth Avenue disappeared was that the 48, some of the 40-some-odd booksellers there were all very strong, self-centered individuals who kept all their knowledge to themselves.
They didn't teach anybody.
and only two sons of booksellers went into the business.
That was Donald Weiser, W-E-I-S-C-R.
What was the name of that?
It was Weiser's bookstore.
Donald went into it, and now he's an occult book publisher out of Maine.
So he no longer has a retail store.
Yeah, in fact, his retail store closed about five years ago.
And his retail store in Fort Abdon didn't specialize in a cult, too?
Well, he was specialized in a cult, but he was a second-hand bookseller.
He actually had a good gimmick that you enjoyed.
He put the books out on tables, and he had a succession of about 10-12 tables.
And every day, practically every day, the books would be moved to the back.
as fresh stuff came in, and the books in the back would be marked down and put up front until they were down to practically 35 cents each.
Very interesting.
But that was the way they operated, continuous rotation.
You mentioned that, was this endemic to the species, that they kept all the information to themselves?
It was just, they were strong individuals, including my dad.
Were they largely Jewish?
Yeah, mostly Jewish.
And was this
a trade that they learned from many of the immigrants?
Did they come here with this still?
No, I think a lot of them were American-born.
You only have a chapter in this book on the Jewish booksellers, by the way.
Look, I think Martin will give you more information on their religion, but I can't remember the background.
Yeah, they all came out with Depression people.
I mean, Argusy used to be on the book.
I didn't know that.
Way, way back.
But we were the first, one of the first ones to leave for it that year, and we moved over to Broadway.
And this is what's going to be interesting for you.
And one of the reasons we were successful on Broadway, which was not a book tour, which was off the beaten track of Hook Park, it was more street track.
We got off a dead street onto an active street.
Do you think if you hadn't moved from 4th Avenue to here that you'd still be in business?
Do you think you wouldn't?
Well, it'd still be in business.
I don't think it would be successful.
It wouldn't be the business that it is today.
Yeah, it wouldn't be what it is.
But it was just, there was so much more traffic and more people.
To go back, everybody talks about it.
It's true.
I mean, I'm there to echo.
I want to backtrack.
We left out the park.
There were strong individuals that didn't impart anything.
They all got old.
and fade it away.
They couldn't face the doubling of rice.
They couldn't face the increase in expense.
You know, they were too old and tired, so they just faded away.
Can you think of a few names?
No, there was Stammer, there was
But I mean, you're right, if the rents were increased, then they would find another part of town to move into and make that a bookman.
We went from 4th Avenue, where we were paying $110 a month rent.
And it had just been increased, so, you know, $110 to Broadway and 12th, where our rent was $400.
Everybody thought we were crazy.
We were scared.
Before I bought the building, my landlord was getting a check for me every month for $55,000.
So I went from $110 a month to $55,000.
I bought it in about a year and a half.
And I understand you're planning actually to redesign.
We have designs to take over another floor, a second floor, and open up the retail space.
So we would have four floors of retail?
Yeah.
Are you going to change the nature of the business?
Just expand all the sections that we have, make it a little more user-friendly, and get more hard books on this planet.
We've got stores on the 10th floor and the 5th floor.
How would you describe this bookstore?
Is it a second-hand bookstore?
Essentially, it's a second-hand bookstore.
Tell me about that.
You basically initiated that here, didn't you?
And I've read in various stories that this is a teaser.
Is this something that you make money on?
Well, we have to make money on it because the volume is so big.
But we don't make a lot of money.
What amazes me is that you buy everything.
The problem is we have to buy everything, and we get stuck with a tremendous amount of material.
That just doesn't even sell to half price.
But that's quite a compact you make with these customers.
That's the only way I can get the books.
We buy them all across the books.
The only time we won't do that is when we find out that there are lots of new things.
And I think that's essential.
It's a good thing.
Do you sell a lot of these reviewers' books to institutional libraries?
Yes.
As a rough estimate, how many reviewers would you say?
Hundreds.
And all over the country.
It took us many, many years to do this.
And of course, one, I think,
You maintain confidential... Absolutely confidential with all people we deal with.
And how long has... I don't want the world to know who I'm dealing with because I don't want competition on that.
And you basically have Claire Fields in New York doing this, wouldn't you say?
More or less, yeah.
I'm sorry to be jumping around here.
I would like to get a little more detail on the institutional stuff that you did.
We have a lot of librarians coming into business.
They're trips to New York, but they're in New York.
They come back and they select the books.
That's one way.
We do a lot through our catalogs.
We produce lists from the libraries.
And then many libraries just order from us a place where we go blanket orders.
any books that they're ordering before they order them from the publisher or the distributor.
I did an interview with a woman who just opened a new university library in Florida.
It's not even a year old.
It's a year old.
Next one.
She's the one who got the books from Uppsala out in New Jersey, $450,000.
She was a steal.
She left the whole college library.
But she said to buy a new academic book, the average price is $51 a book.
The published price is probably up there, yeah.
And so she was trying to explain what a great deal it was.
Now, assuming that to be the case, the institutions that do business with you are getting a pretty good deal, right?
Oh, absolutely.
The ones that do it, yeah.
But the librarians are too lazy to do it.
That's what it is.
Oh, they have a fixed budget.
Well, if they have a fixed budget, they need to come to us.
So you would say you do business with hundreds of librarians all over the country?
Ivy League schools, would you say?
Some Ivy League schools, some in the film.
Are you at liberty to name any of these?
That's fine.
My feelings aren't direct, but any question in your own hands, don't blame me for asking me.
Well, our customer list is confidential.
That's fine.
But with all this talk about paradigm shifts away from print culture to electronic culture, you personally have not seen a reduction?
Our sales have gone up continuously throughout this whole time.
And our sales have gone up with the Barnes & Noble's competition there, too.
Barnes & Noble has a superstore five blocks north of me, on Union Square North.
Four-story, dealing with second-hand books?
No, new books, singles.
But I mean, they draw customers, and then they've got another superstore, five blocks more.
And then their main store is still at 18th and 6th.
18th and 10th, which is five blocks, six blocks a year.
So I get surrounded by them, and I say, as I continue, I say, go ahead.
You don't do the kinds of things that, you know, Powell's is it, or the tattered cover, I mean, they're nice, they have readings, and they have authors.
You don't have to do that, do you?
We don't have the space of the time, really.
But would you do it if you have the space?
We've done a couple of them.
We find that they're good time consuming.
And then they interfere with our customers coming into the store.
So I think that we're just really focused on the book.
And forget about the fixtures and everything like that.
That's our coffee bars.
That's our thing, is books.
The best prices, the best quality of books, the getting the volume in, trying to help customers, and that's it.
I will probably use this quote certainly in the bibliopiece.
Because I've already written a lot of Berto Leibold.
I've read the Leibold piece.
Oh, sorry.
That won't be another book.
He said, my wife and I visited him in Milan in November.
He said, this is his favorite place in New York.
Oh, yeah.
He comes in there all the time.
Barnard.
How does that happen?
How does it happen that you have people?
And he's just... Sometimes he finds such a variety of material there.
That's what it is.
And it's always fresh.
There's always something new.
So you can walk in here and see different things.
You indicated that to that?
One of his books is probably the biggest bestseller we've ever had, which is Shadows of Hyper-Reality.
He told me about that.
Absolutely incredible.
Yeah, because I talked to him about some of the themes that he writes about.
And that book was written in the 1970s.
He's anticipating everything that's going on now.
And he said to me, that is the biggest surprise of my life, bigger than Name of the Rose, bigger than anyone else.
He said, because we just put together some pieces.
And he said, that book,
I heard a story about the book.
I'd love to hear it.
Okay, it was Hartford Grace.
Hartford Grace had their hardback on a light sale at $3.95.
So we bought a hundred.
And we put them on display and started selling right away, so I bought another two hundred.
and it started selling right away, so I bought another 500, and it kept selling.
Then I ended up buying about 2,000 of it altogether, because it just kept selling.
It was like 40, 50 a week, and I had to run with a winner.
And this is the pay-per-view?
No, the hardback, 395.
Wow.
Okay.
Then I called Harcourt for us to try and get another 500, because I kept pumping up my stock, you know?
And the gal says to me, oh, the white sale's over, you can't have them anymore.
So I said, well, you know, we did buy 2,000, and it's just the white sale's over in a couple of days.
I'll tell you what, can I make a special deal with you and get 1,000 more?
She says, well, I'll have to check.
And she comes back, and she says, OK, you get 1,000 more.
Mind you, I'm paying you $2 each.
So I get the 1,000 in, and about three weeks later,
Marlboro has them for $1.95.
They dump the rest.
So mind you, I had paid her $2.
Now Marlboro is offering it for $1.95, that's 50%, so I can buy it from a dollar.
So I place an order with Marlboro for another $1,000, and he gives them for me at $0.80 each.
And I call Harper at this, and I said, look, you know, you charge me $2 for the book, and
Now I get it for 80 cents.
This isn't right.
And she said, well, you're a tough one.
So I had to go all the way up to Janovich, and he finally told her to keep me happy.
That's a fair story.
You could have just returned those books, actually.
Well, you couldn't.
It was a white sale.
I mean, in total, I probably got about 5,000, 6,000 copies on this remainder.
Now, it took three, four years, five years or something.
We finally sold them out.
Now, we bought it as a new paperback.
And we're selling it at a discount, what, from $6.95 to $7.95.
And we're still selling it.
And in fact, I'll give you a quota to that story.
No, we're still selling.
Well, when I went to Italy in November, I bought my copy here, because I needed it, and I wanted to read it before I entered it, and just ran at it.
And I think I paid $7.98.
$7.95, yeah.
So that was, you know, I mean, partially it was a bestseller for me, because I got all the copies.
There are other books that I got.
5,000 copies of them.
Do you do a lot of new books that you buy directly from the publisher?
We buy a select number of new books from the publisher to satisfy our customers' needs.
We sell them mostly at a 25% discount.
The best sellers are 30 more.
Close margin.
We don't make much money.
So you're competitive with the chains on that.
I have to be competitive with the margins.
I go below them.
I don't want my customers walking out of here and walking up the bars and overs to get the books.
I don't do it on all the books.
all the best sellers.
It's the best sellers that are more intellectual.
Yeah, the quality will extend to that.
We said that the biggest difference when you move to Fourth Avenue to here is that we have a lot of street traffic.
So what was the nature of the business over there?
Well, Fourth Avenue was a dying street.
At one time, it used to be very, very active.
Wanamakers was down there.
On Saturday, the street was mobbed with people buying books.
Wanamakers closed.
How would you characterize, or can you characterize, the typical shenanigans of custody?
We have early things from high school students coming in here and college families.
Farmers.
They usually buy a lot of books.
That would be one characteristic.
They're big readers.
The typical customer will come in and buy one, is that right?
They usually buy, yeah, it's not just one book at a time.
The sales are generally four or five books, and sometimes 20 or 30, depending on who or not.
And how do you keep it fresh?
Are you constantly alert to moving new titles out front?
Oh, yeah, the tables are changed.
The display tables are changed.
And the process is policy.
Yeah, they're changed every week, and they're freshened up every day.
We try to weed out the aisles of old books, and we always make sure that we put the new books on, and that's a real emphasis on all the shelters.
Are you afraid that by expanding the store, changing it, that you're tinkering with something that really works well?
Well, one of the architects that I, the architect that we've had, do the basic designs for us so far, is a, I can't pronounce his name,
I've talked to him, by the way.
In fact, I've got to do an article.
Okay.
And when I discussed... But I didn't discuss the screen.
You can discuss it with him.
He knows the screen.
He's got a huge article library.
I'm going to go see it.
One of the things I said to him when we were talking about it, I said to him
If you take the job, do you think it would make the story as it was before?
He's done the Trump, but I did a search on him.
His reputation has been made in taking historic old buildings, Manhattan buildings, and adapting them
making them modern but retaining the character.
His resume is really unbelievable.
I've done a very interesting background search.
Hello.
Do you think of any interesting anecdotes over the years, any really good, strange stories?
Are there any really that you can think of?
Sure.
Where is he?
What anecdotes?
Well, I remember it was fun.
I remember when I was 16 years old, it was all my father and my grandfather and I had to see everybody's eyes and things.
What year was that?
Well, I've got a lot of things.
Oh, okay.
Nancy, so Nancy.
Don't worry about it.
Go ahead.
Yeah, don't worry about it.
Some great stories.
Well, you know, it's kind of fun, this whole thing with, we bought this library out in, out in the Hamptons.
Oterio's Library.
Phyllis Stine's at the Hedge Grove.
Oh, sure.
But it doesn't have the whole story.
And my father can tell you more.
Marginbothal originally arranged for his father's beautiful art library.
Excuse me, it was at this place called The Creek.
Just so I could see it.
And I guess Ron Perlman had it, you know, bought this place, this huge estate, and told this guy Ted Dragon, you know, Sarah's lover, that he had to move out with him to win.
So they had us buy the whole estate, and it was huge, and we got three truckloads, and not in all abs.
And then Ron Perlman... Can we get that?
Yeah.
Can I get a question?
Sure.
And then Ron Perlman took this beautiful estate and converted it into what he wanted.
And then he called me up and he ordered books for me.
For all the cottages, the guest cottages for the Mayhouse.
Ron Perlman, he's Revlon, he's one of the biggest.
He had emphasis on fiction and American history.
It was kind of fun.
I have already written a piece I did for this Four Seasons magazine.
Right, that you sent me.
Which is how you build libraries for people.
Tell me a little bit about that.
Oh, it's so much fun.
I know I've already got some information on it, and I'll probably use that again.
But does that happen often?
All the time.
I did three yesterday.
Actually, it's kind of fun because somebody asked my father, what does he like best in the book business?
My father said he loves getting the estate and going through big lots.
It's almost a treasure hunt for him.
My favorite thing at the store is putting together libraries.
One person taking them apart, one person putting them together.
So I do lots of libraries.
I do three different kinds, basically.
One is just filler books.
Hi.
Okay.
Basically, there are three kinds of libraries I do.
I do a lot of just the books by the foot, like they don't care at all.
And our cheapest is $10 a foot.
Now, these are you selling or renting?
Selling.
Yeah.
I mean, I can do a rental on it.
It's the same way.
You sell people books at $10 and running for it.
Right.
And I ask them, do you want old books or do you want new books or do you want a mixture?
And so I just do it.
A lot of people just call up.
They give me their credit card.
We just ship it out to them.
What do they want?
They tell me how many feet.
It depends.
I mean, some people don't care what they have in their house.
This is actually for decoration.
Yeah, decoration.
Some people it's for shoots.
You know, it just depends.
I've done lots and lots of hotels.
They usually want just reading material for their clients.
It's not even reading or it's just something that fills shelves.
It's for ambience or something like that?
Yeah, it's mostly, I think, well, it could be for either one.
You don't ask.
Mostly for filling.
But they have to look good?
Oh yeah, they look good.
Are you alert to how the spines are going to look?
Oh yeah, absolutely.
So you're actually selecting them as if they were fruit or tomatoes or something, right?
Yeah, butterflies.
They have to project an appearance?
Yes.
So do you look for color?
Do you do things like that?
Well, if they tell me if they have, I ask them if they have any preferences, and sometimes, you know, I, well, for instance, I did one in Florida, and they told me only, you know, bright colors, like hot pinks and yellows and things like that, so I did that for that.
That was with Laura.
Yeah.
I think my own age, right?
Right, right, right.
So it just really depends.
And then, you know, if they have somebody open up a restaurant, it's more like a brewery type restaurant.
We pick the older books.
If it's more for hotel reading, we do fiction books, usually clean kind of fiction for that.
So you do, there is some degree of selection in royalty.
Whatever they want.
Sometimes, usually it's not all that much.
That's one.
Well, another thing that I do is usually like leather-looking or leather books, either way.
It's still by the running foot now.
Yeah, it's still by the running foot.
Leather-looking, it's $50 a foot.
And leather books, it depends on what kind of degree it is.
It starts at $200 a foot from the actual leather books.
And then the third category would be when they really want, you know, subject areas and for me to really put together a great library on any subject.
That's a lot.
So tell me some kinds of the subjects.
You mentioned Steven Spielberg's library.
Right.
And that was basically what the art, he just wanted a library, but apparently he wanted the arts or he wanted... Yeah, he wanted, he gave me a budget.
It was a little bit in reverse.
I didn't get the footage.
I got how much money.
How much he was willing to spend.
Yeah.
I'm trying to remember, I think it was $30,000.
And I got the credit card, and then we delivered them.
They wanted it done right away.
I mean, usually these things, it's kind of funny because you think books are... I always have book emergencies happening all the time.
Oh, congratulations.
Yeah.
Only in New York.
Right.
Yeah, I mean, you know, a lot of set designs, too, we'll change that.
We'll do... Because the movie industry is really here right now, so we'll do a lot of the...
The director will change their mind about shooting and I'll have to get the books to them by this afternoon.
There'll be book emergencies whenever people have parties.
A party that I had to get things FedEx overnight into Maine so that they could have the party.
Obviously there's no logic.
FedEx is going to be expensive.
And I hate that because I would much rather have them buy more books or better quality books.
You mentioned once that you had a dinner party with candlelight and all this stuff and she wanted the leather books.
What's your rental fee then by the way?
Do you also have a rental fee?
Usually it's half of what our
or purchase prices.
So if it's $10 a foot, it'll be $5 a foot.
$5, yeah.
But how long?
I actually don't care that much about how long, because it's all about putting the books together and giving it to them and doing the administrative stuff.
We have so many books here that immediately the spot gets filled in right away, so it's not really like a lost opportunity.
So I usually, you know, I've done six-month rentals even.
They even have me
and sending books out to California for movies.
Any particular movies?
I'm not such a media person.
Was it Twilight?
Was that a new movie?
That was the one out in California.
You can think of any.
I'll give you a call.
Let me just give you a newspaper and I'll tell you what one's.
First Live Club, Godfather, Fray.
I'll call you next week.
Okay.
So many.
There'll be things to go over anyway.
When you're actually asked to build a library as you work with Spielberg.
Right.
What do you, I mean, now, what do you bring, what do you bring to bear here?
Do you call librarians?
Do you ask, I mean, if you're really trying to build a strong library, what kind of criteria are you applying?
Well, I always do it as if that was a library that I would want to have.
So that's where, that's what I base it on.
And then I will go to the art department, to Richard, the head of the art department, and I'll say, what's the best books on this subject?
And he'll help me with that, or I'll go to Craig and there are books.
And it will be a mix of second-hand rare and new books.
Yeah, I mean, it depends on their budget first.
I gave him a lot of rare books because I really wanted a high quality library for them.
Did you hear it back?
Did he like it?
I got it through a decorator, Naomi Leff and Associates.
She's really big.
Naomi Leff and Associates.
How do you spell her name?
N-A-O-M-I and L-E-O-F-F Associates.
And so I've done libraries for Tom Cruise with her, too.
But you've done a library for Tom Cruise?
Yeah.
Do you think a guy like Cruise would go pick his own books?
Well, they don't have time, and they want a great library.
It's the best thing to do.
I mean, these people are working all the time.
I would do it that way if I had the money and no time.
And I've done it for the Hearsts.
You mean Randolph's head first?
Yeah.
Actually, I don't really know if it was... Is that the only one that's... I'm pretty sure it was William.
Yeah, is that the only one that's... He's in the Hearst organization, and he's singing all the... I wouldn't use that one.
You can say the Hearst.
The Hearst.
Yeah, because I don't...
When did you, this is something you originated, right?
Do you call it?
What do you call it?
Well, the book rentals originally originated.
I mean, Fred had been doing libraries, but not to such an extent as I did.
I put them in all the production.
I advertised in all the production books.
And I got a good reputation around with the prop people.
I mean, it's just a small community, so once they know that you're reliable and that you can do good work.
And they tell me, a lot of times they call up and they'll tell me what their characters are in the movie and they'll tell me if he did it.
Yeah, so I'll just pretend that I'm, you know, let's say, a girl 13 years old likes books on horses.
That must be fun.
It is fun.
It's imaginary.
Have you ever seen any of your books in front of the movies?
Oh, yeah.
I mean, even the Today Show in the background.
Those are yours?
Yeah, we do all of NBC, ABC, CBS.
Oh, that's great.
Yeah, it's a lot of fun.
Cradle Will Rock we're doing now.
How old do you answer?
37.
And how old is your father?
70.
So, tell me a little bit about the future.
The future of the business.
The future of the store?
Yeah.
Well, I hope to be running it.
30 years from now, we're not rolling.
I want to do this for the rest of my life.
So, how do you see the strand in the year 2030?
Well, I want to get the second floor.
I want to advertise.
I want to have the
downstairs i want to have the sign expanded all the way out and to have carts all the way on the floor you know all throughout the side and i want to have um
either stairway or escalator leading up to the second floor, and all the floors kind of united into the four floors, so it's easy access into all of them, and to always keep it in an old-style store, and emphasize maybe that it was founded in 1927, and that there's a family goodness, and always emphasize the used books.
Always emphasize what?
The used books.
What is it about the used books?
I know for me, whenever I go into any new city,
The first thing I look for is... Office?
Can you call for a team?
I'm not sure.
Okay, bye.
I'm always looking for the secondhand bookstores.
What is it about these books?
Well, they're much more interesting.
There's a whole history behind it.
And you never know what you're going to find, right?
And you're going to find books that you never do exist in.
Right.
That are going to be absolutely irresistible.
That's why a woman interviewed me last night from the West Coast about the Berkeley Library.
This new book, as I mentioned, is dealing with a lot, but the library is a problem.
She was interviewing me.
And he said, tell me what it is about going into a library with a lot of books.
And I said, I'll give you an example.
Last Friday, I was at Whitener Library at Harvard.
And I went in specifically to get a book that I can't find anyplace else.
And I'll check it online.
Plus, the public doesn't have it happening.
It doesn't have it.
They can't even get it out into a library alone.
And I went in, and I got it fine.
But while I'm there getting this book,
you know, three volumes over to the right is a book I've never heard of.
And I said, let me tell you what it is, because I Xeroxed the whole thing.
And I said, that's the beauty of going into a library.
It's the beauty of a secondhand bookstore.
It's finding a book that's even more interesting than the one you were looking for.
You know, as interesting as the book on the Durham Cathedral Library was that I was looking for, this other book on medieval English libraries was infinitely more fascinating.
And I think that's, I'm sorry, that's a long,
You're absolutely right.
But that's kind of what happens, I think.
I don't even mind when books are written on inside.
I mean, I like to see that.
I like that, too.
Tomorrow, I'm talking about Tony Grafton, Anthony Grafton, got his books.
I'm seeing him at Princeton, because he's writing about readers, the readers of books, as reflected by the annotations that they've entered.
Oh, that's funny.
History, you know, what you can tell about readers through history.
Pretty interesting.
I love books that have a history.
It's much better to give gifts like that when people are giving new books.
On the occasion that General Madness was published, I acquired a book that was published in 1851, New England authors, and it had been given by a man to his wife in 1851, and then a child
I couldn't follow, but then a second generation had given to somebody else, written in there.
And then I wrote in a hundred years later, you know, on the pub date and Gentle Madness, you know, blah, blah.
And she said, gee, should you have done that to that book?
I said, number one, trust me, we've just made it a very valuable book.
This is not right now a very valuable book.
If anything ever becomes Gentle Madness, which it did.
But, you know, it's kind of nice to have a,
to see the history of this book over 149 years.
I think I'm basically supporting the dresser there.
Again, so your plans for, your thoughts, what do you think?
Well, we are getting the books on computer right now.
And you bought the building, so you know you're going to be here.
Yeah.
That's terrific.
So the books on computer are actually getting on computer much quicker than I ever imagined, and the technology is really good with it.
You mean entering the inventory?
Yeah, so that's going to happen, and we're definitely looking at the web.
Do you have a website yet?
Not yet, no.
We want to have the books on there, too.
We want to have an accurate inventory, so we're working that out right now.
Do you have any figures that you can disclose?
Sales are like 29.
I don't do the rest.
That's fine.
I think we look funny.
What do you think?
Is there anything that I haven't asked you that I should know that you can think of?
How about your father?
I mean, were books always a part of your life?
Yes.
My brother, on the other hand.
What's your brother's name?
Stephen.
With a V or a V?
With a V. It's an E-V-E-N.
Yeah.
He's older or younger?
He's eight years older, but he's got a design eye.
He's not that interested.
What does he do?
He does renovations and architectural.
Are you a reader?
Do you read a lot?
Yeah, I do.
I read all kinds of things.
I think this is funny, though, because as much of a sickness as the people that bring home the books and collect them, I have a sickness where I don't really want to accumulate books at all.
Why?
Because I just, I read them, and if I like the book, I want to make sure it comes back to the store so that it can be resold or somebody else can enjoy it.
But you have so many books here, too.
Yeah, yeah, because I think maybe this is my home, and so I don't really, you know... But I think that's contrary to everyone else.
I don't know if anyone else is like that, so... How about you, Fred?
Are you a... Have you always been a... We just talked about Nancy.
I asked her, you know, books have always been a part of her life, and she's a leader, but she likes to bring them back.
Well, I'd maintain a library at home with about 1,500 books.
And my general rule is when I bring something home, I've got to bring something back to rotate it.
It keeps creeping up on me, but if I didn't do that, my house would look like my warehouse up here.
But I'm overwhelmed by books.